Excerpt from The Story of Al Baydha: A Regenerative Agriculture in the Saudi Desert. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T39QHprz-x8

"Today it is a common belief that people are inherently bad for Earth. That by our very existence we do damage to our home, and that the best thing we can do is reduce our footprint. What most people don't understand is that reducing our footprint means destroying the Earth less quickly. We do not have to settle on being less bad for the Earth. We can actually be good for the Earth. We are not destructive by nature, but by habit. And our potential for destruction is mirrored by our potential for regeneration. The Al Baydha project shows that if we recognize our role as a keystone species on Earth, then we can become the primary vector for regenerating our planet. 

When we degrade ecologies it stems from a fundamental misunderstanding of the real value ecologies have. But by tying rural wealth to ecological function we can create powerful incentives for people to care for their ecologies rather than to degrade them. Furthermore tying rural wealth to ecological function lays the foundation for regenerative systems like the one we prototyped in Al Badya. Broadly applied, regenerative agriculture and regenerative economies have the capacity and potential to address a Gordian knot of challenges that we face all over the planet. Rural poverty, food scarcity, freshwater scarcity and aquifer depletion, biodiversity and habitat loss, dead zones in our oceans, deforestation, desertification, soil erosion, and climate change."

- Neal Spackman
