Transcript excerpt from Commonland's John D. Liu's intro in the following fireside chat: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f9F-lT5XxO0

Okay, so, um, you know, it's really a kind of, um, hard time for a lot of people right now in the world. There's quite a lot of anger and violence going on, and winter in the northern hemisphere is coming, so there's also the changes in the weather. So, the people who are homeless or the people who are hungry or the people who are fleeing from violence in different places are having a really hard time.

And I noticed that a lot of people kind of get into a mood where they're angry, and they're, um, we were—I was just in London. I spoke at an event in London, and, um, there was this enormous demonstration, and people were very, very upset, and huge numbers of people came out. But I'm not really sure exactly what that does. You know, if we all get angry and we march around, I—I'm not sure it actually changes too many things.

But if we work in ecosystem restoration communities, it can change the soil. It can change the water quality. It can increase the amount of water it can hold, the moisture close to the Earth, and alter the temperatures on the surface of the Earth and go back into a natural cycle where the soils are replenished with nutrients and with microbial and fungal communities, which are the basis of making the mineral nutrients bioavailable to plants and ultimately animals, including ourselves.

So, what I like to think about is that in making this movement and working with everyone in this, in this movement, we actually can do something that is useful immediately to restore damaged ecosystems. Um, we were just talking with our colleague in Iran about the desertification in many places, and that's how I started in this, to in this idea of studying and documenting and learning about about ecology was looking at desert systems.

And the systems I was looking at were unnatural deserts, so they had not been deserts. They had been beautiful places, and they were transformed into terrible deserts. So, what I learned then, and that was about 30 years ago, was it's possible to rehabilitate large-scale damaged ecosystems. And from that time on, I've considered restoring large-scale damaged ecosystems to be more important than anything else that we could do.

And I've also come to understand that as an individual or as individuals, we can't do what needs to be done. We can only do it if we all work together. And what I'm really excited about with the ecosystem restoration first camps and then communities is that what can happen is that more and more people join this movement. And when everybody joins this movement, then we're going to have a different outcome.

And right now, when we look at the society and we see all these things which make us angry, we're pretty worried about the violence and the number of people who are not being served by the society and the civilization that we have now. And we can look back at that and understand what happened historically, but really what we need to think about is what's the future going to be? Are we learning from what happened in the past? Or are we—if we, because if we don't learn the lessons from the past, we're destined to repeat them.

And now we're seeing things that look like World War I and World War II. And so, for a very long time, like a hundred years, we're reliving again the things that the society should have already learned. And now we also have even more dangerous weapons, and the impacts when I, when I look at many of the landscapes—I mean, ancient Persia comes to mind even that the concept of destroying the landscape to defeat your enemies is the basis of some of the destruction in those regions and maybe all of the destruction in those regions because it creates feedback loops which then alter the hydrological cycle, alter the soil fertility, alter the biodiversity, and ultimately it collapses the ecosystem.

And then what we see is the civilizations that are in these areas where the ecosystems have collapsed, they're terribly challenged. And so, I think we're now at a place where it's been called the anthropocene now. And we—we look at evolutionary impacts, or we look at geologic impacts or cosmic impacts on Earth systems. And now we're talking about that human impacts on climate, on biodiversity, on soil fertility, on hydrology are equal to cosmic or geologic forces. That's extraordinary.

We have a negative impact if we're thinking of it this way. But what I've seen and what I think more and more people are learning is if you can destroy ecosystems, you can restore ecosystems. And if we all restore ecosystems, the inference is we could restore all degraded lands on the earth. So, if we can, why aren't we doing that? And I would say that the reason we aren't doing that is really because we've been valuing other things. We've been valuing materialism—how do we get a bigger house or more cars or more airplanes or whatever it is that we want, more computers or whatever thing. But now, go and look at the dump and realize that everything that we're making is ultimately ending up in this trash heap.

And we can't even—we can't control it. It's out of control. There's too much. I mean, imagine the archaeologist a thousand years from now are going to be digging around. And when they get to this—you know, like if you're studying archaeology or many different subs from paleontology to a number of things, you make core samples. And when you make a core sample and you bring it up and you look at the core, you can actually see through sediment layers and put the time on what you're finding.

When a thousand years from now, they put these cores into the ground, they're going to find the toxic layer. And they're going to say, what, what, what was the civilization thinking at that time? Because there's all these persistent organic pollutants that are, you know, carcinogenic or, you know, never, never disappear, not biodegradable. Why would they create and then live in a place that is so unhealthy?

And so here we are, six years ago, there was a—seven years ago, there was an article written called Earth restoration peace camps. I'll put the link in here later if you haven't already seen it, share it with everybody. And then after that, thousands of people started to say, well, let's make ecosystem restoration camps. And now we had to create a foundation to do that. And so that was six years ago. And six years ago, there were zero camps, and the first camp was built in Spain. And now 65.

So when I consider this kind of development trajectory, there could be 60,000 in five years or 10 years if we're serious about this. Because it looks like everywhere in the world, people are willing to restore their Earth systems because it's immediately impactful on their soil fertility, on their hydrology, on their productivity of their agriculture, of their biodiversity, and of their peace and well-being. So, I think we all should not think about protesting too much. And I think we should protest or name what's wrong, but we shouldn't spend a whole lot of time on that.

We should spend quite a lot of time on bringing people together in peaceful communities to restore ecological function in a way which will help everyone. And that can ensure that the children and the next generations to come have the safety and the peace that they need. And ideally, those people who are being violent look around and they say, well, maybe it's not a good idea to have this kind of thing. We've learned more. We're older as a civilization. We're older as a species. And we have consciousness. What are we doing with this consciousness? What are we doing to determine our intentions individually and collectively?

So individually, if we say, well, I think I prefer to work on the soil and the water and the vegetation and the biodiversity and the wildlife and having everybody live together in harmony, that's better than saying, well, I think I'll work to get as much money as I can and take care of myself and not worry about anybody else. We can do this if we all have the same intention and we all work together for the good of all.

So today, we're going to hear about a camp in Costa Rica, and there are some very interesting things in Costa Rica. But I'm—I have never been there. I've been in the region, and I've heard a lot about it. I've met one of the former prime ministers in conferences who told me that they have no army, and they don't feel that they need an army. Even if they had an army, what could it do if giant other armies decided to invade them? They—you know, they would lose. So what is the reason for the army? What they need is peace and they need functional ecosystems. And I think that's what we all need. So that's what's on my mind.
