Transcript of William Rees' video https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3Hy_soodK3U

We could probably stop right now because ian's pretty much covered everything i have to say so, if you just want to leave it at that, i can uh step into the background. Just listen to the questions. If not, we can proceed. Maybe i can add a little bit to what he's had to say. Please proceed. What i want to do is two things really, and the first is to prick the fantasy bubble right now. Most of the world is lunging forward on the idea that climate change is the problem confronting us, and i think union is already already put back to rest, but there's a lot more to it than that. So, first of all, let's put climate change aside for a moment and recognize that the real problem is something else, and i want to do this to better equip all of us to engage in the policy discussions that lie ahead. First of all, climate change is important, but it's certainly not the the existential threat. What we have to keep in mind is that renewable energy, and mostly right now about 94 of the investment in the world in renewables, is going into wind turbines and solar photovoltaics. It'S not even the solution to climate change and and for one thing it can't quantitatively replace fossil fuels, so we are going to have in fact we're already beginning to have a bit of an energy crisis between following the news coming from europe. In any event, almost all of these so-called renewables are both ecologically and socially damaging. All are dependent on fossil fuels. All the wind turbines and solar panels on the planet are made using fossil fuels and we'll have to replace all of the equipment currently using fossil fuels. With equipment capable of using electricity produced in in inadequate quantities by the non-solution of wind and solar power, so that's a tremendous commitment of fossil fuel just to replace fossil fuels, so they're not really renewable and near merely replaceable wind turbines wear out after about 15 years And and solar panels 25 to 30 years, so they have to start all over again within a short period of time. So the real problem - and ian is emphasize - this - i won't be labeled - is overshoot, and what this means is that we are using the biological assets of the planet in excess of the regenerative capacity of ecosystems and we're polluting in excess of the assimilation. Capacity of the natural environment, so this means we're literally consuming and polluting the biophysical basis of our own existence and that's the definition of biophysical unsustainability. Uh here are a whole bunch of other symptoms. I would say at least two of them are at least as important as climate change in the dilemma confronting us, but the bottom line is this: all of these things are caused by overshoot. Climate change is just one symptom. Addressing any of these symptoms in isolation cannot solve the problem of overshoot and untreated. Overshoot is a terminal condition. You cannot continue to degrade the biophysical basis of your own existence without at some point going into a terminal collapse situation. Obviously, climate change is a good and well-known symptom uh. We know uh from the data that, for example, the last six years have been the warmest in the instrumental record. In fact, nine of the ten warmest years have occurred since 2005.. So there's no question. This is a big deal, but other symptoms are just as important. If we look at biodiversity, which ian touched upon, we have rough estimates of the biomass of various species going back 10 000 years and if we go back, then this is the book, the dawn of agriculture, wild mammals, where about 99 of the total weight biomass of Mammals on earth humans were much less than one percent, but with the advent of agriculture at about this time actually and more recently, fossil fuel things have changed dramatically. So humans now comprise 32 of the biomass of animals and mammals on the planet. Cattle and other livestock comprise another 67 percent, so all together, humans have now taken over somewhere between different estimates but 95 to 98 of the biomass of mammals, leaving wild mammals with only one percent of the total biomass. So those great herds that we see in nature series on television are reduced to a tiny fraction of their former existence. They'Ve literally been competitively displaced by human beings because on a finite planet, where all creatures are living on the constant throughput of a limited amount of solar energy, the more humans take, the less is available for everything else, so we've literally competitively displaced non-human wildlife from the Ecosystem from their ecological niches and we're taking over their habitats and food supplies - and it's not just mammals, wild bird populations are tumbling. Domestic poultry now constitutes 70 of the bird biomass on earth. The average populations of monitored species of wild vertebrates have declined by 60 percent. In just the last 50 years and populations of invertebrates are also in free fall, various estimates uh very controversial, but nevertheless pretty evident. Now we have to take very careful regard of this graph. This is simply a plot of human population growth over the last 10 000 years, the series uh the sequence that i've looked at and you can see that through most of this period and in fact we had extended the access to the left by a couple of Hundred thousand years human populations fluctuated in the vicinity of their local carrying capacities. Growth didn't occur, growth is a relatively recent phenomenon. The result of in the first place agriculture, but most particularly with the access to abundant supplies of fossil fuels early in the 19th century. In fact, just about 200 years ago now, what fossil fuel did was relieve humans of all the negative feedback that kept us down. Every species, including human beings, are capable of exponential growth, but normally in ecosystems. There are factors that maintain populations within the carrying capacity of their ecosystem, food structures, there's overcrowding, competition, uh, predation and so on and so forth. But with fossil fuel we, in effect we eliminate the shortages of energy resources, food and so on, so that for the first time in our entire evolutionary history, just 200 years ago, we were freed and were able to express our full potential as a biological species. For exponential growth, so we've seen for 200 years, a phenomenon 10 generations of people out of thousands who take growth to be normal, or at least this type of growth to be normal. But we have to keep in mind that what you're observing here is a the single most abnormal period in the history of our species and it's almost entirely um the result of our abundant use of fossil fuel. This just nails that point home in we can see a six times increase in population, a nine-fold increase in energy use, uh per capita and a 55-fold increase in energies uh in total 1850 through 2010.. Exponential growth is really interesting. Humans, don't generally understand it, but look at this curve. This is the real curve for oil and gas coal use in the last. What half century or more 50 of all the fossil fuels ever consumed on planet earth have been consumed since 1991.. So, roughly 30 years, let's see what i'm saying in the last doubling of the human enterprise we've used half of the energy ever used by human beings, fossil energy i happen to have been born in 1943, so 90 of all the fossil fuel ever used has been Used in my lifetime, no other generation of human beings can make a statement like that. That'S how incredibly unique this period is, and we take it to be for granted. It'S an absolutely astonishing oversight that we don't teach our children a little bit more about the growth phenomenon under exponential terms, so the consumption of just about everything else has also exploded. We needn't belabor the point, and the point is, though, that all of this has led to this state of overshoot. Now we were among the first to quantify it with our ecological footprint analysis uh. What we're able to show is that on earth planet earth today these data from 2007. I think now the global um availability of what we call bio capacity, just the total amount of productive ecosystems on land and water, so grazing land, forest lands, agriculture, lands, fish fishing grounds and so on and so forth is about 12.1 billion hectares. That'S all there is on the planet and yet, in that same year, 2007 or 2017 uh humans were using the earth as if it were 20.9 billion hectares. So the difference is overshoot and it's a factor of 73 percent. How is this possible that we can use the earth as if it were 23 or 73 percent larger than it is, and the answer is that we're drawing down natural capital assets that took a millennia to accumulate in the ecosphere, so the mass of forests, the huge Accumulation of rich soils of fish stocks, and so on and so forth that took hundreds in some cases, even millennia to accumulate are being now depleted, uh thousands of times faster than they can regenerate in nature. So we can do this until we're flat out, of course, of any resources, but that will be just a few more years. Everyone on earth is currently now competing with everyone else for a shrinking bio capacity. So there's the double dilemma: we continue to grow by 80 million people a year, uh the economy by two or three percent per year, which means doubling in just 23 to 35 years, and yet the biomass upon which we survive. The the capacity of the ecosphere is declining with every depletion of assets that we are responsible for. So basically, we need to understand overshot even to fix climate change, overshoot results from too many people consuming too much energy and too much material resources and discharging excessive wastes. Solving climate change by any politically acceptable means solar, pv, wind turbines, electronic vehicles, carbon capture and storage, and all of these things will not stop climate change. Why? Because this whole approach? It comes from a mainstream perspective that is designed and you can go online and look this up to encourage massive investment. Lots of different investment corporations see climate change. It'S a huge opportunity to make profits, so the entire approach to climate change is designed to encourage investment in high-tech manufacturing, to create jobs and basically to enable continued growth. I call this business as usual by alternative means, and it will in fact not fix climate change, because it's fossil dependent in the first instance and it's going to exacerbate overshoot. On the other hand, if we actually approach overshoot, we can reverse not only climate change that address all of the other significant symptoms. Now i've always been fascinated by how we got into this mess. So what's what's really going on here? How can homo sapiens, allegedly, the wise man have made such a mess of things, and the reason i think is that the human brain evolved to cope with very small tribal groups in relatively uh knowable, predictable ecosystems, very small home ranges, and so there was no need To think much beyond that, and we naturally tend to think in rather simplistic linear, reductionist waves, simple cause-and-set relationships, and that was adequate for the 250 000 years of human evolutionary history. Until very recently, modern techno-industrial humans have created a world of mind-boggling, multiple overlapping global scale. Rapidly, changing non-linear systems that make up the complex, modern human world system, but our brains are not neurocognitively equipped to understand, let alone control. Any of that. We cannot truly grasp the workings of the global economy, geopolitics or the internet, let alone the climate system and the ecosphere, so we've literally lost control of the system that we ourselves have created. There'S another issue here i mentioned that humans, like all other species, have this capacity for exponential growth and indeed it's always existed, but it has been constrained by that negative feedback. But once that was released, we expressed our full biological potential, shared with all other species, to expand, to fill all accessible habitats and to use all available resources and in the case of humans, of course, availability is constantly being refined by refinements in technology. Um new zealand was occupied by humans. I guess what about 800 the year 800. So it's an example of the expansion of humans into all accessible habitats all over the planet, and we now have the largest geographic range of any species, except perhaps the rats and mice that follow us around and we're scraping the bottom of the evil of our planetary Barrel for resources, so we're the best expression of these two tendencies of any species on earth. There'S another problem because overshoot is exacerbated by nurture as well. So on the one hand, we have a natural predisposition to expand, but we also have created mental constructs that aid. This and humans are unique in that we socially construct our realities. Basically, we make it up as we go along, but it's more accurate to say that we're not constructing reality. Obviously, we construct conceptual lenses through which we perceive the real world, and some of these we call political ideology, religious doctrines, economic paradigms, scientific models or cultural narratives. The trouble is that these conceptual lenses that we construct these are made up through social discourse, determine how we perceive reality. Okay and then we live out of our constructed realities as if they were real. So right now we are inhabitants of something called modern, techno-industrial society and we are living out of an elaborate social construct called neoliberal economics. The problem is that neoliberal economics promotes unlimited economic growth. That'S a social construct derived from our very recent history of growth and enabled by continuous technological advances, and this reinforces our innate potential to expand, and you can see various statements in the literature of this one of the ones i like best is julian simon. We have in our hands now the technology to feed clothe and supply energy energy to an ever growing population for the next seven billion years. That'S not human modesty. Talking now, control theory or cybernetics has given us two very powerful statements to understand. What'S wrong with neoliberal economics, the first is: we cannot regulate our interaction with any aspect of reality that our model of reality does not include so right now, we're trying to run the world with a model of reality called neoliberal economics, but it contains no useful information About the real world that brings up ashley's law of requisite variety. Basically, if you're trying to manage something, your management system has to match the diversity and number of states of the system that you're trying to manage. And if it doesn't, you have a problem quote when the variety or complexity of the environment exceeds the capacity. The variety or complexity of the regulatory system, the environment, will dominate and ultimately destroy that system, so our economic construct has to be evaluated in the context of ashby's law. Neoliberal economics is simplistically. Reductionism comes from that privilege brain it's basic models, contain zero, useful information about the structure or dynamics of the ecological or social systems with which the economy interacts in the real world. Neoliberal economics is utterly incompetent to guide modern, culture's interactions with either biophysical or social reality. So here we are trying to fly a planet of infinite complexity, with a model that contains no information about the nature of that environment at all, and in case you think, i'm spinning my wheels here or making this up here's a graph that appears in just about Every standard economics textbook, it's called the circular flow of exchange value and it's the basic model of the economy, which sees businesses and households in a mutually reinforcing relationship. Households spend money on goods and services provided by industry, but industry provides wages and salaries uh to households. In exchange for labor and investment capital and with each cycle here, the system grows, but you'll notice, there's no connection to anything outside of itself, so the fundamental model assumes the economy is separate from and exists independently of the ecosphere when, in fact, this is a more Accurate description of the reality so again we see that economic model down below, but the goods and services are produced entirely from available energy and matter extracted from the ecosphere which contains the economy and all of that energy and material sucked into the economy is returned to The ecosphere as degraded dissipated, energy and matter and by the way this includes all the final products, so everything that enters the economy returns to the environment. It'S not an environment at all. It'S the ecosphere that contains the economy uh as degraded high entropic waste and uh. That, then, is our problem. We'Re over consuming from the left and over polluting on the right. We in overshoot are really a malignant parasite on the planet. We are gaining the vitality. The growth and maintenance of the human enterprise occurs at the expense of the reduced vitality of our host ecosphere, we're literally polluting and consuming our host ecosphere from inside out and propelled by this constructed growth narrative. We cannot even implement our own negotiated climate agreements, so this is a simple plot of the increasing carbon dioxide concentration over the past. What 60 years 70 years or so and you can see a steady increase. All is going up, and we've marked on here the major climate agreements that we've reached. I'Ve also put in the limits to growth volume, the world scientists warning the humidity about humanity, rather back in 1992, we're heading out of glasgow in 2021, when the carbon dioxide has been outreached 417 parts per million, which is almost 50 percent above pre-industrial levels, and the Point of this curve is to show not just the increase in carbon emissions, but the fact that none of the agreements that we've entered into none of the international conferences have had any effects whatsoever. You can't detect the date of their occurrence on these curves. It may have been steeper had we not had those meetings at the point that we've done nothing to reverse climate and again i come back to this curve. The driving factor is the exponential growth of the fossil-powered human enterprise. Well, we have to look back at that curve because there is a warning from population ecology. What goes up will come down. This is taken straight out of a standard textbook on ecology. It shows the boom bust cycle that occurs in some species when introduced to a new habitat with plentiful resources. There'S a boom a phase as the resources feed the exponential growth of that population, just as we see in the human case and uh that the whole point of this is to show that, as matters stand, the expansion of the human enterprise resembles this early boom phase Or plague phase of a one-off population boom bust cycle, and it wouldn't be the first time these are real data from reindeer populations introduced to islands, offshore alaska, when there's plenty of lichens populations boom and then bust, when they run out of resources. Well, humans are no different. The only way that we can really fix overshoot and with it, climate change and so on, is through significant reductions, and that means 50 overall globally and up to 80 in in rich countries of energy and material throughput um. That is the scale of overshoot at the present time. The 73 that i showed you earlier amounts to 50 global deductions and 80 percent reductions in rich countries. If we wish to reach or uh to equilibrate again with the natural hemosphere so to act consistently with their best, science would require a planned economic and population contraction to perhaps the one or two billion people who could live more equitably and quite decently. Within the means of nature overshoot is that extensive at the present time, the choice before us is simple in some sense and very difficult in another overshoot is a terminal condition if we stay on this track. There'S no question that the human enterprise will contract violently as other species do when they deplete their fundamental resource base. But we apparently are an intelligent, plant-capable species and we can therefore theoretically choose between business as usual, which means risking a chaotic implosion imposed by nature, followed by geopolitical turmoil and resource wars, or we can decide that we can avoid all of that by a well-planned, orderly, Cooperative sent toward a socially just sustainability. I didn't know about the curve that the inn showed us. This is my own. Some work, i'm talking is very similar, of course, carrying capacity and overshoot. When you overshoot carry capacity, you lose carrying capacity, so we should have followed the green curve. The green curve would be the curve of an intelligent species, recognizing that it's approaching its planetary, carrying capacity and organizing to control its population level and levels of consumption to remain below that carrying capacity as matter stands, we've gone into overshoot system, a lot of carrying capacity, So the best we can be now is to drop down from the height of our overshoot to the dotted web line, which is uh, i think we're carrying capacity that currently stands. The other option, of course, is the systemic collapse following the solid red line. Well, the record so far because human beings are natural discounters place much more importance on the present day than future days on our friends and relatives than on unknown strangers, far away, and so on. So far, we've chosen that that first option business as usual, but alternative means it's a way using new technologies to save the economy and maintain the growth ethic. But this is delusional on the planet in which we live. Part of the problem is that we live in an age of unreason science, denial and magical thinking. We'Ve entered the endartment as opposed to the enlightenment. There are literally hundreds of websites dedicated to denying everything we've talked about in this meeting and to diluting people into thinking. All as well and again since we socially construct, we must prefer the reassuring. Why, to the inconvenient truth that we've been addressing here today. So again, we are simple brain. We choose simple, linear solutions, but they're dead wrong in a very complex world. So right now, wind turbines, solar, photovoltaics, electric vehicles, smart cities, geoengineering and so on are the favorite solutions to our problem uh. Unfortunately, they will lead to continued overshoot and a greater fall than if we take things seriously. The complex solutions, but perhaps right in the circumstances, means reducing your equal footprint, lifestyle changes, uh degrowth, leading to well-improved uh, leading to improve well-being, including social and economic security. So we need a new cultural narrative. We have to make up a new story by which we live, recognizing that the human economy is a fully contained, dependent subsystem of the non-growing ecosphere, completely different concept from thinking of the economy as a totally separate and independent solution. The cult of growth, which simply means quantitative, accretion or getting bigger through techno efficiency, must be replaced with an emphasis on development, which means qualitative improvement and greater social equity. So what we're really aiming for here, if we were smart enough to recognize it globally, is a goal towards smaller steady-state economies in which fewer people can thrive more equitably within the regenerative means of nature. Nature supports us: we can't destroy the basis of our own support, so some of the things that should be done are an immediate phase-out of non-essential and frivolous uses of fossil fuel, including all private vehicles, and that means electronic vehicles as well they're, not that much better Than gas power vehicles in the long run, atvs jet skis leaf blowers, air transportation and so on. We should remain allocate the remaining fossil fuel through essential uses such as in agriculture and food processing. Our food supply is utterly dependent on fossil fuels. It will not be electrified, so what are we doing? Burning up our last fossil fuel budget uh? To maintain automobiles on the road, for example, we need strong carbon taxes and depletion taxes and move toward full social cost pricing. Almost everything you buy in the market today externalizes much of the cost of production and that's simply economically unsound. We need to relocalize essential manufacturing and food production, design, fair income taxes and a minimum income strategy. We need to reorganize settlements into more self-reliant, steady-state, urban-centered bioregions. Integrating into their local ecosystems, with the loss of fossil fuel, global trade and globalization, it will begin to break down we're already beginning to see the problem with broken supply lines, just as a result of the little blip caused by the covered cove pandemic. Now we need to become more self-reliant on a local, certainly national level. We need to store the ecosystems and life support services that nature provides. We need to implement a global, non-coercive population reduction plan. Now none of that will fly today. It may be ecologically necessary, but what is ecologically and socially necessary for sustainability is not politically feasible until this all-in-all, that's that may be treated as not feasible. Unfortunately, the politically feasible is echo of pardoning ecologically and socially ineffective, if not catastrophic. So, assuming that present content's continuous trends continue, the odds are quite good that humans will become the best informed extinct species on the planet. Thank you very much. Well, if that didn't shake us all up, let me ask a question, while others are just composing their minds, if that's possible after this talk um, i i want to reflect what i think is going on in people when they listen to what you both have said. Um, it's it's extremely disturbing. It shapes up one's construction of the world and you have both referred to the fact that it it it does shake up. How one sees the world the lens as one uses, to see the world, and - and i wonder if perhaps each of you might like to to comment on how how we can um how we can proceed to assimilate material that you both have have delivered to us? Um, how how we can step by step, take that in and integrate it uh to to revise our construction of the world and and what might be next steps for an organization like like this climate forum, to move ahead on the basis of of the construction of Reality that you both have presented to us, my goodness, your question, i suppose the most important question facing all of us and it would take a day to answer it. Even from my limited knowledge of this. There are many many forms of social learning moving forward and we're all engaged right now in one of the most common. Obviously, we've come together and we're attempting, together to socially construct a new understanding of our reality. So that's the commonest thing that people do and i want to play on this a little bit because since it is a part of human nature, we just take it for granted. But you know very well: there are many, many different competing ideologies on this planet so but there are many many different social constructs from which different people are acting, and these are very powerful. Social constructs are more powerful than reality. I hope i've underscored that so the extent to which your social, construction or understanding is a good map of reality, the better things are going to turn out. Okay. So let's go back 10, 000, 100, 000 years to where this all began. Here'S what happens when a young person is grown into a particular cultural or tribal context. He is exposed, or she is exposed repeatedly to the tribal norms to the midst, the cultural beliefs, values and assumptions, repetition, repetition, repetition, and by the time that individual was a young adult. We now know that the continued repetition of ways of thinking about things, ways of perceiving about things literally help to shape the brain, so your neural networks are shaped by repetition of the norms of your particular cultural context. Okay, so this was highly adaptive. If you think about it again, going back a few hundred thousand years or a couple of hundred, not now a couple hundred thousand, let's say it was a great advantage for a young person growing up in a small tribal circumstance to acquire the sense of tribal normality. The beliefs values, assumptions and mythology of that tribe because it gave you a sense of identity, a sense of belonging to the group and contribute to the social cohesion of that small social group. So there's a huge advantage, then to acquiring the beliefs, values and assumptions of your group, but keep in mind that when we evolved that way, nothing much changed. You'D live your entire life and nothing changed in the course of. Even somebody lived to be 90 years of age. It was the same environment when you died as it was when you were born, so that you acquired a sense of belonging to a circumstance that was unchanging. Everything has changed today, so we still have that tendency to culturally acquire the beliefs, values and assumptions of our society. But things are changing so rapidly that the things that you learn as a youth are completely irrelevant: outdated, defunct by the time you've reached adulthood, and yet we can't change. So what happens? We go into a state of denial. Okay, everybody's familiar with climate denialism everybody's familiar with people who are well vaccine denialists. So what we wind up with is a situation in which the pre-assembled brain circuitry becomes a barrier to new information to contrary information. In fact, we know that once our circuitry has been established, we tend to seek out people who think the same way. We do we think about circumstances that reinforce these pre-existing neural structures and we deny forget or simply ignore, contrary information. So that's the situation we're in today. It'S just been the last few decades in which we've seen this massive change in climate, massive change in the environment and yet we're living from a socially constructed reality that insists that growth is normal, that human ingenuity can overcome any obstacle that there's no reason whatsoever to Suppress our human ambitions and that's precisely the wrong attitude to have when the world is evolving at such a rapid pace around us. So my first point here really is a long way of getting to what i realized. That is that it's very difficult, through the social learning exercises we're doing now to overcome the pre-established visions of the world that we've acquired by growing up in a particular culture. Yet we have to do it and we do it through repetition, repetition, repetition, because we need to create new neural circuits, particularly among the youth. We should be teaching the kinds of things that chappie and i have been talking about here from grade school forward, so that the next generation, if there is one evolves with an attitude towards a world that is compatible with the reality in which we find ourselves. Okay, so education is exceedingly important, unfortunately takes a very long period of time. Now somebody mentioned that we've got to think from the ground up. So, unfortunately, if we look historically at things when have the major shifts taken place, it's because some group in society has been disadvantaged or becomes enlightened and literally takes to the streets right now. Most of our politicians are the captive of the corporate sector. We see there's just been in the last week. The release, i think, was on the bbc of evidence that thousands of lobbying efforts have gone forward to the cop meetings to get them to tone down the message. Okay, so the corporate sector, the the major advisors to government that are going into those meetings, are already being uh, sailed with information telling them that climate change isn't that big a deal we've got to maintain economic growth in the you know, labor markets, and all of These sorts of things, so we have this huge effort afoot to defeat the the whole enterprise of even coke, which is a tiny fraction of the overall problem. Now, that's corporate lobbying from above politicians pay enormous attention to this, because those folks sponsor their electoral campaigns and so on the money. The elites are, the people running the global society today using the model of neoliberal economics. That'S a simple reality. Everybody knows - and somebody mentioned at the outset that we see within most countries, including new zealand, a widening gap between rich and poor, so the wealthier, getting richer. The poorer stagnant are getting poorer and we're seeing this incredible divide occurring and at some point it becomes impossible to maintain any kind of uh normal political discourse, because the tribal understanding has broken down. There'S no longer any unity of understanding about the nature of our situation and people will take to the streets and i'm not advocating revolution. But i am saying that social insurrection is the most rapid way to get major change occurring because at some point the political process has to recognize that these people vote and there's more of them than the corporate donors who are keeping the whole system together. So, yes, we need to educate ourselves. We need to repeat these arguments. We need to engage politically as often as uh rigorously as we possibly can, and chappie mentioned the letters they've sent to the prime minister and so on. This must continue, and at some point you may reach a tipping point where it becomes obvious that we need to move in this kind of new direction. That'S all i can say, because social change takes a lot of work, because we get stuck in our constructed ways of thinking and it's very difficult to develop a novel. A new way of doing it just think how long it takes for something like the civil rights movement or the gay liberation movement or women's movements to take roots decades of labor on the part of advocates before it becomes. Of course, obviously women deserve the vote, but it took you know several hundred years to get to the point where people thought well. Obviously. Well so we've got to get to the point where obviously we have to live within nature. Obviously we can't keep consuming like this. Obviously, this income back is income gap is completely egregious. We need to share more the limited wealth of the planet because we're growing more people and we're destroying the world. So if we're going to survive at all, it's got to be an entirely different mode of understanding than the one we've got now. That was a very helpful answer. Thank you. Thank you, but let me turn now to everyone else, and ali and julie and peter and okay, ollie. First um. Thank you bill for a fantastic presentation. Can you hear? Can you hear me okay? I can hear it. Thank you. Yes, absolutely wonderful! It'S like a uh bucket of cold water at the face. It'S just the best thing. I'Ve heard, and i thank you for two reasons. Firstly, that i want to learn, and secondly, i'm not mad. I'M a wikipedialistic climate activist. I fully agree with civil unrest trying to change people's attitudes. I come to a climate forum, we discuss recycling and traffic lanes and i want to scream because i think all these initiatives are really worthy but uh, i define them as a shallow publisher. I can't hear you now: it's all garbled again for some reason: okay, i'll, come closer to the speakers, speak towards the speaker. Is that good now bill? Can you hear me that's better much, better, okay, cool, so um? I come to a climate forum and when we talk about um, what we're doing i i i find that it's very much promoting uh the status quo and it's all defined as what i would call shallow ecology. I see um. This is like an anthropocentric attitude to to nature, which serves to promote ongoing capitalism, and capitalism is the means by which the industrialized nations destroy the biosphere, demanding endless growth on a on a finite planet. Um, and really, i can only describe it as a death cult. Uh one giant ponzi scheme uh, if you like, which is really in danger of collapsing, because the wobble is happening at the moment more and more um, and i really see this as a fundamental issue as to if this is not dealt with, then nothing else really Matters um and you've really cemented a lot of those beliefs for me today with your excellent presentation, my question uh: what's the uh, what's the situation with the global population reduction as a climate activist, i would often get a lot of flack for this, because i have Five kids, so tell me: oh, can you hear me something just happened there you're clear, still yeah yeah you're right, look right now we're adding about 80 million people per year to the world population, so just about one percent and that's going to remain that way. For some time, because of the very large number of young women of reproductive age, this is an extremely difficult situation, because we we can show using our equal footprint analyses, for example, that most of the increase in global impacts right now are not being caused by the Rich quarter of the world's people look. This is very tricky for me to get into this without misleading people. There'S no question that the richest quarter of the world's population - and i include in that number everybody in the room, including myself. We have responsibility for 80 90 of the damage that has been caused to date, but there is an upper limit to the amount of stuff you can consume. So the footprint of people at the high end of the global income spectrum has stagnated, but it's growing rapidly in the middle income group and in those middle income countries, especially that have high population growth rates. So it's fair to say right now that the major driver of the growing human footprint is a combination of increased population and higher incomes which results in even more consumption in the global middle income group. Now i'm often pillory for raising this, because it implies that i'm saying those people can't grow because i have a right to remain in my particular position. That'S not what i'm saying! Here'S what i'm saying and listen very carefully if you want to be sustainable on this finite planet, which already has a shrinking bio capacity. The only way that can occur is for the world's poor to remain poor. You hear what i'm saying the only way it can happen is for the world's poor to remain poor, because if everybody on this planet now, we won't even count the additional two and a half billion people expected by the end of the earth. If everyone lived the way we do in new zealand, for example, we need three additional planet earths. If everyone lived the way we do in north america, that goes up to five. We don't have five additional planeters or even three or even one. We have one planet at present time. The growth of the human population, combined with rising per capita consumption, is literally. This is where my parasitic analogy comes in we're literally consuming the planet that sustains us. That'S what biodiversity loss means. That'S what fisheries collapse is all about. That'S what the destruction we've destroyed about a third at one point: arable soils on earth, climate change itself is a waste management problem, because the other side of consumption is that all of the stuff we consume all the energy and material emerges as waste. At the other end and climate change is being driven by carbon dioxide emissions, which is the single largest uh waste product by weight of industrial countries. So we've simply got to face reality that if we are going to remain in any kind of stable state on earth, we need to control population. We need to reduce consumption, we need to do both and we need to share more equitably the productivity of the planet. In order to maintain any degree of moral uh superiority, not to mention geopolitical stability, that's the reality we're facing and we're facing this reality in the context of a society that has been taught since grade school. To expect each generation to have more and more stuff than their parents and that life will go forward and you'll get richer and richer. If you just apply yourself so you've got that socially constructed driving force and that's the capitalist mentality that their previous speaker talked about. In a world which can't survive that kind of driving force, that's the conundrum of overshoot! And that's and that's why i say this: we've got a huge cultural override that we need to create to suppress and deny the prevailing paradigm any further foothold on the future. Because if it is sustained, we're done for and that's everything that's going on next, you watch the cop meetings. They will come to no suitable agreement. The suitable agreement would be a massive reduction in energy and material consumption. The phasing out of private automobiles, the elimination of air travel, for example, at least until we get electric planes which is not going to happen, and we that's the reality. We want to face and nobody's going to face that reality. Uh coming from the mentality, perpetual growth promoted by ever improving humans, technological engineering, that's taking us down into your kit, in my opinion, thank you, julie, kiara bill. Thanks for your presentation, um, i was going to ask about geothermal and hydropower, which you didn't mention in your presentation, because new zealanders is wealthy in both thankfully um. But actually, after your previous answer, i want to change my question um and just ask you to expand a little bit on what you said about. Poor nations should remain poor, and so my understanding of population growth um, is that the richer nations of the world generally have plateaued or declining in population and that the poorer countries of the world are exploding in population. As you said, and the key driver for the explosion and growth is food insecurity and poverty um. So if we wanted to curtail their growth in a humane way, um, how would you clarify what what you meant by um by core okay, listen be clear again, these are very tricky areas and i'm almost hesitant to get into them. What i said was that if you want to maintain any kind of ecological stability on earth, then the present poor will have to remain poor. Okay, i'm not saying that they should remain poor. I'M saying that you cannot raise seven million people or seven billion people or eight billion people to new zealand or north american material standards without destroying the planet, so that kind of material growth for everybody isn't in the cards which implies. We have to do something else and the something else is to share the existing material wealth while getting a grip on population. Now the easiest way to do that is through improved economic security, education of women, no question: if women have better access to education, if they have better access to a capital or acquire some degree of economic freedom, they will choose to have smaller families, so you're, absolutely Right to some degree, population growth is being driven by insecurity and so far as people think they need to have more children to maintain themselves in their old age and so on. So that's when this sharing of our wealth comes into play here, we need to fund around the world of programs to elevate young women to the point where they feel economically secure enough that they question of large families, isn't an option for them by the way. There'S a huge problem here with male egos as well. Isn'T there in some situations, because we're overcoming many many different competing social constructs of the nature of cultural reality. Here'S an idea that even people who believe in markets should like it's been proposed. It'S been out there, for i don't know 50 years or so kenneth bolding have proposed this. A famous economist, uh, hermann daly. Another ecological economist, like me, has suggested that look. The easiest way to do this is to recognize that if each family had one child, then over a period of just a few couple of generations, we'd have a remarkable decline in population. So what we could do - just listen very carefully to this - is to allocate every newly wed couple the right to have a child, but this is a tradable right, so that i who have no children, could take my right or my my partner. I could take our right and put it in the marketplace so that if you want two children or three, you can buy the permits from other people. So uh a previous speaker who said they had five children. All he has to do is buy five permits from people who don't want to have any children and you're quite free to have your five uh without putting any additional weight on the planet, because other people don't choose to have any children. So you have a marketplace for child bearing rights, and this way enables people who want more children to have as many as they like. If they can afford it, of course, and those who don't want any children are free to sell their permits or not. If you really wanted to reduce the population, you wouldn't have any children and you wouldn't sell your permit. But the point is you: can establish a market for the right to have children which would be fair, equitable and put nobody in in a invidious position. One example that, combined with what i said earlier, economic opportunity, education for women combined with free access to available birth control methods, would have a remarkable effect over the next couple of decades. It'S absolutely essential that we do this if we're going to come to grips with the population problem and yet there's enormous resistance because of the social constructs of the catholic church, for example, because of the social constructs of different cultures, where male pride is involved in numbers Of children, many many other barriers to a sensible population policy here, even as the world becomes increasingly overpopulated. So it's a solvable problem, but if we don't have the cultural means to solve it, we won't that's what i meant and that we have a real problem because we wrecked the planet. Thank you he's a lawyer you're a bill. Thank you. Um yeah, like julie. My questions keep changing because you're covering such a lot of good ground um, but i i did use your methodology here and nelson and tasman in running the biodiversity strategy for nelson and just thinking about the numbers you have now. I think you're a little optimistic about how many people the planet can support um [ Music ], and we don't need to go into that. But basically around here. You know on your system we're using around seven to eight hectares per person uh to support ourselves, and it would seem to me the implication of what you're saying is to be globally responsible. We should all be using around about one hectare, and so i wanted to check that math, because i mean part of our dialogue is a climate forum might well be there to be socially responsible. We need to reduce our per capita consumption by maybe 70 percent per person because for a period of time, even for even if we do what you've said, the population of the planet is going to be sitting around 7 billion to 10 billion. That'S that's about our lot. Is that about right. It'S headed for 10 billion yeah by mid-century yeah. So how many hectares should we have? Each i mean seven or eight seems pretty high. I think in the states you're sitting around about nine. You know canada around about nine yeah, okay, well, yeah again, this is the carrying capacity question uh, it's not difficult math. If there's 12.1 billion hectares on earth and in about say 8 billion people, then in a completely equitable, totally fair circumstance, each of us would be entitled to the biological productivity and a waste assimilation capacity of 1.5 hectares, that's it and yet in new zealand. I think you're up to six and we're at eight or so in north america, so we're in north america using five times our fair share of the world's bio assets. That'S why we live so well. That'S how we live so well, but keep in mind that in the poorest countries of africa and south america, people are living in less than half a hectare. So that's the indication or the measure of the disparity, even in ecological terms, so that the eco footprint method shows clearly the ecological inequity, as well as the economic inequity. But the bottom line is this: if you have 10 billion people living like north americans, then in theory they would need something like 80 million hectares a planet and there's only 12.5. So it can't happen on the single earth planet without complete destruction of the biophysical capital. That is built up over time and again that comes back to what i said earlier. You want to have a stable planet, then everybody who's poor has to stay that way and, of course, that's an unacceptable solution by any measure. We therefore have to devise a different solution, and that is the solution that you mentioned. We need to reduce our eco footprints from six, seven, eight or whatever. It is in europe, north america, new zealand, australia down to that 1.6 on average. Now the good news is this: you should also get a book out of the library called factor. Five factor. Five shows that, with existing technology, we could reduce our consumption of energy and material by 80 without any important change in lifestyle. Okay. Now, unfortunately, okay, so that's that's a kind of an efficiency argument. It'S well illustrated, but the book factor five will show you that it's at least technologically possible to achieve the kinds of reductions that we're talking about the problem. Is that, contrary to intuition, every major improvement in efficiency results not in less consumption but in more consumption? So much of the environmental movement is based on the idea that we've just got to get more efficient if we produce twice as much with fewer resources or if we can produce the same with fewer resources, we're going to be better off, it doesn't work that way. Unless there's other interventions in the economy, greater efficiency results in cheaper goods and services, because the costs of producing them decline. If something is cheaper, you sell more of it and companies that go more and more efficient, get a bigger share of the market, which means their profits increase, so their shareholders get bigger money and they can pay higher wages and salaries to their employers, employees. So the net effect of efficiency over the past couple of hundred years is clear. The cheaper goods and services become the wealthier companies are that take advantage of it. So you wind up with a situation in which there are cheaper and cheaper goods and services, but people have more and more money to spend on them, so consumption increases rapidly efficiency alone. Solves no problem. Now, there's ways around this that involve the tax system and how we price things, but so far no politician has been willing to go there because people demand the right to have the cheapest possible everything, and so it's become again. Our accustomed to the term is externalize. The costs of production onto the environment or other people who can't afford to fight that so three basic points. We can solve these problems theoretically, but we won't do it until we're willing to bite the bullet in the basic message that that uh ian - and i were talking about - we are in overshoot. If we stay in overshoot, it's fatal society will collapse that the population will implode. It will do so chaotically unless we decide as a so-called homo sapiens to do this in a rational way, taking full advantage of our technologies, taking full advantage of the knowledge we have about the nature of our reality and taking full advantage of the need to change Dramatically our lifestyles that they they are compatible across the board, with a limited and indeed shrinking ecosphere, we're doing none of that this year, consumption is up again. Fossil fuel consumption is up, emissions are up as we're rebounding from the um pandemic, so we're really not on board at all with this in any major country. Thank you. Thank you. Bill. Apologies to those who have questions. Sorry! Well, let me let me check with with the um with people um, including including bill um, there's a suggestion that we keep going for some more minutes um, which will mean we'll end the in the forum a little later than one um can i can. I have some some indication of whether whether you would like to do that or whether you'd like us to keep on the timetable. If, if you want to keep going put your hands up, oh my goodness, okay bill, are you able to keep going for say? 10. 10, more minutes yeah. I have 12 minutes 12 minutes. Okay, that's fantastic! Let'S use them all right! I don't know who is. Thank you bill. That was a remarkable presentation and i agree with pretty much everything. I agree with pretty much everything that you said um, but i'm gon na stick my neck out. I'D like to change your um, your holistic paradigm. At the end, i'd like you to look at an alternative paradigm and the main reason i'm doing this is because here we've got a whole lot of people who are concerned about the climate, and i'm just concerned that after they've heard your talk, they'll all go and Play golf and not be bothered anymore. I agree with you that the planet is an overshoot and climate is a very small part of that, but climate change, i think, is much more important than what you say, because all the other things have been around the planet for a long time. Climate change has only come out really recently, and people have changed people when i first started doing this were climate deniers now they're climate delays and and when you look at that plot of the effect of um of the different meetings on climate change. That'S because the politicians haven't had the people behind them. If the people were behind them, then the politicians wouldn't make those choices, and what i see is that climate change is an incredible lever. It'S an incredible tool to bring about some of the other changes. If we can knock some of the capitalists, the oil producing companies off their pedestal, we're making some definite progress. So i believe that we should all stay together, work on climate change and use climate change to get to where to get to a beginning point so that some of the other cards on the table will collapse and that's pretty much all i wanted to say well. Thank you for that. I think that's a very useful contribution, but let me perhaps explore it a little bit two things. First of all, you're absolutely right. Climate change is an enormously important problem. I wasn't for a moment saying that it wasn't. I was saying that it's a symptom of a much bigger problem and the problem is that, by isolating each of these issues into its own little box, we focus on it in ways that don't solve the bigger problem and, in fact, won't even solve the smaller problem. Because you haven't solved the bigger problem so again, look at the meetings that take place and that curve shows the story here. They are dominated by people who advocate for the solutions to climate change, being massive capital, investment in wind power, solar power, electric vehicles, electric everything and now we're getting into carbon capture and storage into technologies that don't even exist. Yet in fact, the recent climate models utterly depend on those technologies that don't exist yet in any effective way or the models fall apart. So the problem is that the current approach to taking climate change seriously from a mainstream perspective is an approach that involves investment in large-scale capital enterprises that maintain the status quo. So they don't address the big problem of overshoot. They worsen it. Moreover, they won't solve the climate change problem because well i i i'll send you some paper. Wind and solar cannot quantitatively, that is the in equal portion, replace fossil fuels. It'S just not on so they don't solve the climate change problem. They don't solve the overshoot problem. They dig us deeper into a hole, so we need to take a different approach even to climate change and the only approach that works. If you want to solve the climate problems, you really want to reduce carbon emissions. You have to stop burning carbon and you can't do that if you're going to invest billions of dollars in high technology based on carbon wind towers, solar panels are all built using fossil fuels, the technology that they depend on the factories, the the highways, the transmission lines And all of that stuff aren't built with electricity, which is all the alternatives produced they're built with fossil fuel. So it's a kind of a self-defeating argument. Even in the medium term, we can't say what technology will bring in the future. Here'S a bigger problem, supposing just for the sake of argument that we overcome all the technical problems associated with alternative energy and we are able to replace fossil fuel with electrical energy in all of its domains. Okay, so that's a huge assumption. If it were to happen, it would destroy the planet because, as i've explained over and over again here, the reason humanity expanded so massively in the last 200 years was because of the super abundance of a cheap source of energy. If we have a different, cheap source of energy such as wind and solar electricity - and we keep using it the same way, you use the previous cheap source of energy, we'll simply continue to grow and gut the planet. So, no matter which way you cut this we're not going to solve the problem by addressing climate change. The only way to address climate change is to address overshoot, which means reducing consumption, reducing energy consumption, reducing population. If we do those things, climate change disappears. Sorry, but that's the only way i can see looking at this. Thank you that's i i think time for our last one funny question please uh. Well, i need to give tim [ Music ] bill. Can we make the necessary changes within democracy? Uh? That'S a very good question depends on how you define democracy. I think if, if, if a million people walked in the streets in christchurch and other cities in new zealand in the next few days, yeah you'd find government whistling a very different tune, but that's what it's going to take. There has to be evidence, support that there's an enormous ground spell of people in democracies who are fed up with the current uh government system and the kinds of decisions that it is making, not on our behalves. But on behalf of maintaining the status quo, which will is not look, the status quo isn't even benefiting the majority of people any longer, so we have no stake in maintaining it. We need to get people to be serious. Our politicians to get serious about the kinds of changes necessary to make a real difference, nothing that has look even if all the agreements that were reached at paris, which was a great celebration for everyone, even if those agreements were implemented, it's less than one-third of what Is necessary to reach the paris targets, so our best agreements are inadequate and we don't achieve them anyway. That'S the kind of people we are without the pressure you know to make people make the right decision. I think what what remains is to thank you very much for shaking us up quite quite markedly and uh to to give us tons to assimilate work through think how that might change what we, what we do and how we do it. So, thank you so much bill for being with us and giving us a great deal to think through and rework
